Add IQS005 rule (#2368)
home-assistant/developers.home-assistant: docs/core/integration-quality-scale/rules/iqs005.md

---
title: "IQS005: Support config entry unloading"
---

IQS005 is as follows:

Support config entry unloading

## Reasoning
Sometimes a config entry ends up in a state where it is stuck.
This can have many reasons, but sometimes the integration works again after the integration has been reloaded.

In order to support this, the integration should support unloading the config entry.
This gives users the ability to reload the integration without having to restart Home Assistant.
Reloading an integration can be a powerful tool for users to fix issues with integrations.

## Example implementation
The code required to reload an integration is very little, with a lot of benefits for the user.

The method that has to be added to `__init__.py` looks very similar to the `async_setup_entry` method.

`__init__.py`:
```python
async def async_unload_entry(hass: HomeAssistant, entry: ConfigEntry) -> bool:
    """Unload a config entry."""
    return await hass.config_entries.async_unload_platforms(entry, PLATFORMS)
```

## Additional resources
More information about config entries and their lifecycle can be found in the [config entry documentation](../../../config_entries_index).

## Exceptions

> There are no exceptions to this rule.

Author: I am wondering if we make an exception for integrations that just do not need a reload. I can't think of any from the top of my head right now, but there are some that for example only provide services

Reviewer: I cannot think of an exception tbh.

---
title: "IQS005: Support config entry unloading"
---

IQS005 is as follows:

Support config entry unloading

## Reasoning

> Sometimes a config entry ends up in a state where it is stuck.
> This can have many reasons, but sometimes the integration works again after the integration has been reloaded.
> 
> In order to support this, the integration should support unloading the config entry.
> This gives users the ability to reload the integration without having to restart Home Assistant.
> Reloading an integration can be a powerful tool for users to fix issues with integrations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes a config entry ends up in a state where it is stuck.
This can be for many reasons, but the integration may work again after it has been reloaded.

In order to support this, the integration should support unloading the config entry.
This gives users the ability to reload the integration without having to restart Home Assistant.
Reloading an integration can be a powerful tool for users to fix issues with integrations.
```

## Example implementation

The code required to reload an integration is very little, with a lot of benefits for the user.

The method that has to be added to `__init__.py` looks very similar to the `async_setup_entry` method.

`__init__.py`:
```python
async def async_unload_entry(hass: HomeAssistant, entry: ConfigEntry) -> bool:
    """Unload a config entry."""

>     return await hass.config_entries.async_unload_platforms(entry, PLATFORMS)

Reviewer: I think we need to extend this example or add another example, to show the capabilities here.

While it is true that it will look like this for most integrations, the goal here is to allow for integration code on this place as well. E.g., closing connections, unsubscribing webhooks and things like that.

## Example implementation

In the `async_unload_entry` interface function, the integration should clean up any subscriptions and close any connections opened during the setup of the integration.

The method that has to be added to `__init__.py` looks very similar to the `async_setup_entry` method.
In this example we have a listener, stored in the `runtime_data` of the config entry, which we want to clean up to avoid memory leaks.

`__init__.py`:
```python
async def async_unload_entry(hass: HomeAssistant, entry: MyConfigEntry) -> bool:
    """Unload a config entry."""
    if (unload_ok := await hass.config_entries.async_unload_platforms(entry, PLATFORMS))
        entry.runtime_data.listener()
    return unload_ok
```

:::info
You can also use `entry.async_on_unload` to register a callback that will be called when the config entry is unloaded.
This can be useful to clean up resources without having to keep track of the removal methods yourself.
:::

## Additional resources

More information about config entries and their lifecycle can be found in the [config entry documentation](../../../config_entries_index).

## Exceptions

There are no exceptions to this rule.

## Related rules

> - IQS022 - Entities event setup

Reviewer 2: This rule name needs to be updated after IQS022 is merged. It's not a good name.

Author: Haha, I agree

---
title: "IQS005: Support config entry unloading"
---

IQS005 is as follows:

Support config entry unloading

## Reasoning

Sometimes a config entry ends up in a state where it is stuck.
This can be for many reasons, but the integration may work again after it has been reloaded.

In order to support this, the integration should support unloading the config entry.
This gives users the ability to reload the integration without having to restart Home Assistant.

> Reloading an integration can be a powerful tool for users to fix issues with integrations.

Reviewer 2: I think we're focusing too much on reload. This is not the only use case. When supporting unloading of a config entry, the integration cleans up the resources created for the config entry allowing the user to remove, disable or reload the integration config entry without restarting Home Assistant. We don't need to talk about stuck config entries or fixing issues.

## Example implementation

> The code required to reload an integration is very little, with a lot of benefits for the user.

Reviewer 2: Don't talk about reload.

> The code required to reload an integration is very little, with a lot of benefits for the user.
> This code should also be used to make sure the integration unloads correctly.
> So it should for example unsubscribe from webhooks it subscribed to or close any connections opened during the setup of the integration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the `async_unload_entry` interface function, the integration should clean up any subscriptions or close any connections opened during the setup of the integration.
```

The method that has to be added to `__init__.py` looks very similar to the `async_setup_entry` method.

> In this example we have a listener we want to unload, stored in the `runtime_data` of the config entry, which we want to unload to avoid memory leaks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example we have a listener, stored in the `runtime_data` of the config entry, which we want to clean up to avoid memory leaks.
```
